---
title: Ulysses
author: John Myles White
layout: post
permalink: /notebook/2007/06/01/ulysses/
categories:
  - Citations
---

I always loved the end of this poem from the first time I read it and in the years after then it has only gained deeper personal relevance. Particularly, it has stayed with me after finding out that a woman I loved very much had always focused on the same lines herself, equally and independently sure that there were the best in the poem.

The personal dimension of aesthetics is too little emphasized in aesthetic theory, thogh it is surely one of the most powerful factors in forming our taste. In literature especially, shared taste bonds people powerfully and it even reveals the basic harmony of their minds. Unlike taste in music, taste in literature, being a taste for sentiments rather than sounds, expresses the very stuff of character itself.

Rereading the poem now, I finally appreciate the rest of it. Perhaps it is the years of my own odyssey that have intervened since I first read it that change my attitude or perhaps even the promise of new adventures to come. Perhaps it is a change in personality such that Odysseus more than Penelope seems understandable to me. Perhaps it is simply age's lesson, which has made the Odyssey more dear than the Iliad to me, just as Longinus said was natural for all men.

Whatever the reason that I appreciate it more now, the poem is exquisite.

<blockquote>
<p>It little profits that an idle king,<br />
By this still hearth, among these barren crags,<br />
Matched with an aged wife, I mete and dole<br />
Unequal laws unto a savage race,<br />
That hoard, and sleep, and feed, and know not me.<br />
I cannot rest from travel: I will drink<br />
Life to the lees: all times I have enjoyed<br />
Greatly, have suffered greatly, both with those<br />
That loved me, and alone; on shore, and when<br />
Through scudding drifts the rainy Hyades<br />
Vexed the dim sea: I am become a name;<br />
For always roaming with a hungry heart<br />
Much have I seen and known; cities of men<br />
And manners, climates, councils, governments,<br />
Myself not least, but honoured of them all;<br />
And drunk delight of battle with my peers,<br />
Far on the ringing plains of windy Troy.<br />
I am a part of all that I have met;<br />
Yet all experience is an arch wherethrough<br />
Gleams that untravelled world, whose margin fades<br />
For ever and for ever when I move.<br />
How dull it is to pause, to make an end,<br />
To rust unburnished, not to shine in use!<br />
As though to breathe were life. Life piled on life<br />
Were all too little, and of one to me<br />
Little remains: but every hour is saved<br />
From that eternal silence, something more,<br />
A bringer of new things; and vile it were<br />
For some three suns to store and hoard myself,<br />
And this grey spirit yearning in desire<br />
To follow knowledge like a sinking star,<br />
Beyond the utmost bound of human thought.</p>

<p>This is my son, mine own Telemachus,<br />
To whom I leave the sceptre and the isle -<br />
Well-loved of me, discerning to fulfil<br />
This labour, by slow prudence to make mild<br />
A rugged people, and through soft degrees<br />
Subdue them to the useful and the good.<br />
Most blameless is he, centred in the sphere<br />
Of common duties, decent not to fail<br />
In offices of tenderness, and pay<br />
Meet adoration to my household gods,<br />
When I am gone. He works his work, I mine.</p>

<p>There lies the port; the vessel puffs her sail:<br />
There gloom the dark broad seas. My mariners,<br />
Souls that have toiled, and wrought, and thought with me -<br />
That ever with a frolic welcome took<br />
The thunder and the sunshine, and opposed<br />
Free hearts, free foreheads -you and I are old;<br />
Old age hath yet his honour and his toil;<br />
Death closes all: but something ere the end,</p>

<p>Some work of noble note, may yet be done,<br />
Not unbecoming men that strove with Gods.<br />
The lights begin to twinkle from the rocks:<br />
The long day wanes: the slow moon climbs: the deep<br />
Moans round with many voices. Come, my friends,<br />
'Tis not too late to seek a newer world.<br />
Push off, and sitting well in order smite<br />
The sounding furrows; for my purpose holds<br />
To sail beyond the sunset, and the baths<br />
Of all the western stars, until I die.<br />
It may be that the gulfs will wash us down:<br />
It may be we shall touch the Happy Isles,<br />
And see the great Achilles, whom we knew.<br />
Though much is taken, much abides; and though<br />
We are not now that strength which in old days<br />
Moved earth and heaven; that which we are, we are;<br />
One equal temper of heroic hearts,<br />
Made weak by time and fate, but strong in will<br />
To strive, to seek, to find, and not to yield.</p>

<small>Lord Alfred Tennyson : Ulysses</small>
</blockquote>
